Cultural appropriation is a complex topic that often creates impassioned controversies. Confrontations on the subject typically follow the traditional political divide: the left defends the relevance of the concept of cultural appropriation while the right denies its pertinence. As a result, petty polemics dominate the debate and make it difficult to propose an independent perspective. However, I believe that cultural appropriation is an important topic and will try to take advantage of the absence of any recent controversy around it to reflect on its meaning. We can begin by considering that cultural appropriation happens when certain cultural elements are wrongfully used by people from another culture. The issue is then to determine the meaning of “wrongfully” in this particular context.

While the notion of cultural appropriation appeared in the 1960s/1970s in the field of sociology, its usage did not become widespread until the 1990s. The concept was first created to describe the way American popular culture approaches Native American cultures. Many Native American artefacts such as totems or war bonnets have been incorporated into mainstream American culture in commercial or festive contexts. In my opinion one could hardly argue that there is nothing wrong with using Native American culture to sell cigarettes or to throw a theme party. Those practices are demeaning because they transform Native American cultural productions into some kind of meaningless folklore worn for the sake of entertainment.

Once this has been agreed upon, the issue is to transition from that particular case to a general definition of the concept of cultural appropriation. To do so, we need to identify the essential aspects of the phenomenon observed. It is at this stage that I disagree with many supporters of the notion of cultural appropriation. Talking about a “common approach” to cultural appropriation is quite difficult since there is hardly any universally recognized definition of the concept. A quick search on the Internet reveals the existence of multiple definitions that put an emphasis on different elements. However, I believe that it possible to identify a general theme common to most definitions. The approach to the topic I will call “common” is the most represented among academics and social activists. The latter are the most vocal actors on the issue and they shape the form of public discussions on cultural appropriation.

This widespread definition of cultural appropriation focuses on the idea of historical cultural domination. Thus, its proponents argue that cultural appropriation typically happens when the members of a dominant group use the cultural productions of a group they have historically oppressed. Cultural appropriation is then thought as a form of theft that must be understood in the larger context of colonization. This focus on cultural domination is easy to understand when we know the popularity of postmodern theories inspired by Marxism that take power dynamics, particularly racial domination, as the lens through which the whole of reality can be explained. A consequence implied by such an approach is that Western culture can never be wrongfully appropriated since the West has historically been the oppressor.  

I must concede that, excluding the most extremists of them, proponents of this approach typically acknowledge that there are some cases in which members of a dominant group can rightfully use items from an oppressed culture. Thus, cultural domination is a necessary condition for cultural appropriation to happen, but it is not always sufficient. The circumstances under which exceptions arise are varied but they all have in common to involve some form of the idea of consent. If the dominated group gives its permission, then what would have been theft becomes a gift. For example, someone can use the foreign artefact in the context of a festival celebrating its culture, can make an explicit reference to the culture in question to give it credit or can have the endorsement of an association representing the dominated culture. In all cases, the culture from which the object is borrowed must be clearly identified and its members must be fine with it.  

As previously mentioned, I believe that this approach is mistaken. To see why, it suffices to consider cases in which the two cultures involved have little or no common history. Let’s imagine that people from Vietnam wear Native American war bonnets just the same way as some Westerners do and that, in return, some Native American people wear Vietnamese farmer’s hats in a derogatory fashion. In both cases the phenomenon observed is centrally similar to the archetypical example of White Americans and Native American, and yet, we cannot explain what is happening through an analysis of historical cultural domination. Here is it important to emphasize that I am not denying the role that past oppressions often play in cases of cultural appropriation. All I am saying is that this aspect is not the heart of the issue since it is neither necessary nor sufficient for cultural appropriation to happen. Instead, I would argue that cultural domination often constitutes a kind of enabler of cultural appropriation. It creates a context in which cultural appropriation is more likely to happen.  

I think we must put at the center of the concept of cultural appropriation the idea of not taking the other’s culture seriously. This is where the lack of respect lies. What matters for cultural appropriation is the intent with which the foreign cultural artefact is used. We notice that in all cases of cultural appropriation the item is used to allude to its culture of origin instead of playing its normal role. While the item originally served a function – was pointing to a certain good, it is now reduced to something trivial. In most cases, the artefact is used as a stereotype of its culture of origin for the sake of entertainment. This aspect is very clear when considering the case of the treatment of Native American artefacts in mainstream American pop culture. Native American war bonnets or totems are used for nothing else than alluding to Native American culture.

The common definition of cultural appropriation typically considers that to avoid cultural appropriation, it is necessary to explicitly refer to the culture of origin of the artifact used. The approach I propose here differs fundamentally on that aspect. As previously mentioned, any instance of cultural appropriation aims at alluding to the culture of origin of the item used. But then, how could one stereotype a culture if the audience does not know where the item used comes from? Successful cultural appropriation requires that the link between the item appropriated and its culture of origin is known by all. It is only because everyone associates totems to Native Americans that one can engage into cultural appropriation.

In many cases, both the most widespread approach to the concept and the one I have proposed reach the same conclusion (such as in the archetypical example of Native Americans). But it also often happens that they disagree. I think that the common understanding of cultural appropriation overestimates the frequency of this phenomenon. In many instances it calls cultural appropriation a behavior that, in reality, does not constitute any wrong. We can think for example of the white American girl who got accused of cultural appropriation for wearing a Chinese dress to her prom or to how some people would argue that non-Blacks wearing dreadlocks are engaging into cultural appropriation. In such cases, most of the people oppose the supporters of the notion of cultural appropriation and sometimes unfortunately reject the concept altogether. In any case, they rightfully defend those who are unjustly accused. Here, I want to focus on something different and rarely mentioned: how groundless accusations of cultural appropriation harm the supposedly “victim” culture.

The problem with the common approach to cultural appropriation is that it bars access to the universal to non-Western cultures. When considering that any use of a foreign element without a specific cultural context is disrespectful, we fail to appreciate the fact that the artifact in question can be valued in itself and not for the role it plays within a specific context. This constant contextualization of non-Western productions shut them up; it deprives them of the possibility of reaching all human beings. Let’s take the recent example of the American teenager wearing a Chinese dress to her prom. Those accusing her of cultural appropriation do not seem to consider that she could have chosen this dress just because she found it beautiful. To them, this piece of clothing is first and foremost the expression of a specific culture and not simply a nice item. But would they say the same of a European dress?

We are touching here a fundamental issue. The focus on cultural domination that defines the common approach to cultural appropriation has the consequence of excluding Western productions from the scope of this notion. It creates a situation in which only Western items can legitimately be appreciated by the rest of mankind outside of their original context. While Western productions can emancipate themselves and become part of the common repertory of mankind, others cannot. Language reveals very well this aspect: a Western hairstyle is a hairstyle simpliciter while an African hairstyle is an African hairstyle. Thus, many proponents of cultural appropriation ironically reinforce Western exceptionalism. Overall, the common approach to cultural appropriation infantilizes non-Western cultures.

This feature is visible in the way many proponents of the notion of cultural appropriation tend to see all non-Western productions as “cultural.” In reality, the majority of everyday life items were first and foremost created to fulfill their main function. Thus, when Shanghainese tailors created a new shape for a traditional Manchu dress, they were probably first trying to create something they thought as beautiful, convenient… It is doubtful that they had in mind to make a “cultural” item even though their creation later became a symbol for certain social and political positions. We could say the same for food for example. When people from a certain country invent a dish, they intent to create something tasty, nutritious… not to make a cultural statement. Thus, when using an everyday life item from a foreign culture, one typically conforms to the original reason of being of the item in question. No direct reference is made to the artefact’s culture of origin but the latter is implicitly praised for its ability to create something good.

Supporters of the common approach to cultural appropriation will probably object that I cannot simply ignore centuries of cultural oppression. I think that we can and that we should. What we should not do on the contrary is to reduce non-Western cultures to perpetual victims that are unable to affirm the universal outreach of their productions. If we constantly see everything through the lens of past power dynamics, we are not able to entirely appreciate foreign creations for what they are. Some form of amnesia is necessary if we want to see other cultures with the freshness necessary to take them seriously. In the end, that’s maybe what it means to respect and value foreign cultures: not to see them as contingent products of power struggles but as a sincere, although sometimes mistaken, quest for truth, goodness and beauty.