Secularity is among the most controversial subjects of discussion for any political club. Although a consensus on the desirability of religious neutrality in state affairs exists in liberal democracies, we can’t seem to agree on what the aim of neutrality entails in terms of public policy. I want to highlight here an often overlooked feature of the issue which, I believe, is responsible for most of the complexity associated with our topic. By doing so, I hope to eliminate a few widespread confusions that prevent us from thinking clearly about religious neutrality.

The issue I would like to address concerns the nature of religion and atheism. Religion is a famously difficult term to define. However, for our purpose we can simply consider that it is an ensemble of beliefs about the existence of something. On the contrary, atheism is defined as the absence of a belief in the existence of that “something.” It is important to keep in mind that an atheist does not need to be “conscious” of his atheism. He only needs to be capable of believing in the sort of entity that constitutes a religion and not to believe in any. Thus, atheism is not defined by an active rejection of religion but, much more simply, by the absence of belief in any religion.

The last element we mentioned raises questions on the manifestation of atheism. To be consistent with what we said previously, we must understand that the typical expression of atheism is not someone shouting “God is dead,” but the absence of any religious manifestation. In this respect, atheism differs fundamentally from religions, which manifest themselves in the form of priests, religious education, symbols… Thus, we notice that the respective expressions of religion and of atheism are mutually exclusive. On the contrary, manifestations of different religions can coexist. Even though one religion could consider other ones mistaken, the existence of a mosque in a town does not make the church next to it less of a reality.       

To understand the importance of this difference of nature between religion and atheism, let us first look at the case in which atheism is not present. In our hypothetical liberal democracy aiming for religious neutrality, all citizens are either Christian or Muslim. Designing a religiously neutral legislation is quite easy in that situation. In all domains in which the state and the two religions are implicated, the state can choose any approach as long as it applies the approach equally to both religions: schools could offer religious education in both faiths or in none; the state could financially support the construction of both churches and mosques or of neither… We could compare the role of the state to that of a referee in a game or a sport. For the referee to be impartial or neutral, the specific rules of the game do not matter as much as the fact that he applies them equally to all players. A biased referee is one who applies different rules to different players. Similarly, a state fails to be religiously neutral when it does not have a single set of rules for all religions but instead treats each of them according to different standards.

Let us now come back to the classical situation in which a country has both religious believers and atheists. When trying to apply what we said in the previous situation to this new case, we immediately notice that there is something problematic. We cannot say anymore that the state is being neutral regardless of its decision to fund religious buildings or not as long as the state is impartial in its application of the law. The decisions “to fund” and “to not fund” have very different consequences granting satisfaction to different sides. The difference in nature between religion and atheism is to blame for this issue. We can use the example of the game referee again to illustrate the situation. Imagine that our players are a human and a cheetah. If, as the referee, you decide to have them compete in a 100 metres race, you clearly have chosen your side. The same goes if you decide to have them play a chess game. In either case, applying the rules of the game impartially is not sufficient to be neutral. Because the two players are of different kinds, the rules of each game do not fit their species equally well. A similar phenomenon happens when the state tries to be neutral in regards to religion and atheism.

Understanding this aspect of the problem should allow us to rule out some widespread solutions to the question of religious neutrality. A first position we can examine is a complete separation with religion – also called hard secularism. The idea behind hard secularism is very straightforward: if the state avoids any contact with different religions, none can be said to be unfairly advantaged. In that approach, the state ignores all religious aspects and neither funds nor supports activities related in any way to religion. We could name the hard secularist position on religious neutrality “equal exclusion.” I believe the argument presented in the previous paragraphs shows that such an approach is mistaken. Interestingly enough, the equal exclusion position would be acceptable if atheism did not exist. It would probably not be the best solution to the issue but it would still satisfy the requirements of neutrality. The problem here is of course that atheism does exist and that people affiliated to it often represent a substantial part of the population of a country. In that situation, equal exclusion is not neutral because the laws it entails tailor to the attributes of atheism at the expense of religions. One could at this point argue that had religious believers been atheists, they would not be concerned by all the strange demands of religious believers. So at the end of the day they really should blame their own choices if they are unhappy. However, this criticism is inconsistent with the requirements of religious neutrality since the religiously neutral liberal democracy does not rule on the intrinsic value of different religions and must take the convictions of its citizens seriously.

If you are not convinced, let me use an example from everyday life. Imagine that you are deciding on what to do tonight with a friend. You are in favor of going to the movie theatre while your friend is in favor of not doing anything, just staying home. To convince you, he says “Well, it seems that we are disagreeing here. To solve the issue, I think we should adopt a neutral position. Because we can’t agree on what to do, let’s just not do anything special and stay home so no one’s choice is favored.” The sophism is obvious: the superficially neutral solution corresponds perfectly to the initial wish of one of the two parties and not to that of the other.

A second position on the subject we can reject for similar reasons is one that advocates a deep and expansive support of all religious activities by the state. Once again that approach would be neutral if atheism did not exist. However, once we take it into account, this position becomes unacceptable because it fits the attributes of religions at the expense of atheism. Thus, we cannot call it neutral even if the laws associated to it apply to all religious affiliations equally. Here too we could face an argument saying that had atheism included elements that can receive state support or funding, it would have received it just like all other religions. So, in the end, atheists should blame their own choice if they are unhappy about not getting anything in particular from the state. Once again, we would have to reject that criticism because the way it fails to take seriously the choice of atheists is inconsistent with religious neutrality.   

We have discarded some mistaken solutions but we are still facing the same problem: how could the state stay neutral when the entities involved are not only of a different kind but also mutually exclusive? I believe that the issue at hand is unsolvable in this form. We cannot create an a priori theory that specifies a set of laws that would ensure religious neutrality in all possible situations. All we can do instead is to reach an a posteriori equilibrium acceptable to all parties involved. The only way to find a neutral position between presence and absence is to arrive at a balance in which there is “a bit of presence but not too much.” This is surely not something you can precisely define in the context of a theory of politics. On this subject, we have to recognize the limits of abstract legislative design and give its due place to politics as a practice specific to a particular place. In the hypothetical case we have been considering in which there are only two religions, we concluded that a religiously neutral state must act as an impartial referee who applies a set of rules to all players equally. Here, on the contrary, it is imperative to take into account the specificities of all parties involved. We need to understand what elements are important to the different religious affiliations of the citizens of our country to be able to design a set of laws acceptable to all of them.